---
layout: post
title: Making panels 
date: 2016-08-28
---
With the workbench usable, it was time to make something real.  I took a long walk
down the Basingstoke Canal to think of a project, and eventually settled on a big
wooden chest.  It won't be a fantastically stylish piece, but it will hopefully be 
useful, and a chance to learn something new.  Having decided on the project, 
I searched through blogs and web pages for pictures and ideas, and discovered that 
a tool chest is a fairly common first project.  I also discovered that there are 
tens or hundreds of them on eBay and Etsy, but I am still going to make one for 
myself.

The basic concept is a hinged box, about 30" long, 18" wide, and 15" deep.  I would
like to have a shallow box for the lid; not just a flat panel.  A weatherproof edge
between the box and the lid would be nice, but that may be a bit of an over-reach.
The first thing needed is the panels for the box.  I haven't yet found a good, local,
timber merchant, so the panels are going to be laminated from the 2 1/2" x 1 1/2" 
studs that I can get cheaply and easily.  I started with the offcuts that I already
have, splitting them lengthwise with two cuts on the table-saw, planing the edges,
and gluing them together.  I don't have any long clamps, so I screwed some blocks
from scrap onto the ends of a few long battens, and tapped in some wedges until the 
glue squeezed out.  I left each panel clamped for a full day, so over the weekend I
managed to make two panels about 14" wide, and little under 3' long.  The surfaces 
are very rough and will need to be planed smooth, but the joints look strong.  I am 
pleased with the result.
