---
title: "Not a NAS"
date: 2026-01-24
---
## Upgrade time

Yesterday my raspberry pi 3B server went dark.  All of a sudden it just wasn't 
visible on the local network.  Power cycling didn't bring it back, so I took it
into the lab, connected a monitor and USB keyboard, and...
it started up fine!  But it still wasn't visible, because wlan0 was down.  My
first though was that the Broadcom chip had finally expired - it is 10 years old.
No worries, a wi-fi dongle should solve that, so I rummaged in the parts box and 
found one, but I couldn't start wlan1 because raspbian-stretch is so old that it
doesn't have drivers for 802.11ac!  So that basically forced me to update to a
newer version of raspbian.  I installed the imager and flashed trixie-lite 32 bit. 
The pi 3B would support 64 bit, but with limited RAM I thought it might be 
better to stick with 32 bit.  With trixie, wlan1 came up immediately, so I set
about reinstalling my "not a NAS" solution.

## The hardware

My "not a NAS" consists of two USB hard drives, a high-power USB power supply 
and the pi 3B all in a cardboard box.  Since I thought the Broadcom chip had 
probably been cooked, I put the raspberry pi 3B into a plastic case with a 
cooling fan.  Oh my goodness!  That cooling fan is so tiny and so cute.  And 
the case just makes the installation look so much neater.  A few quid well
spent!

## The concept

It really is simple.  
1. Hard drives mounted at /mnt/usb_hdd1 and /mnt/usb_hdd2.
2. Automount on startup with /etc/fstab.
3. Share /mnt/usb_hdd1 using samba.
4. Backup /mnt/usb_hdd1 to /usb_hdd2 regularly with cron.

## Mounting the drives
Plug them in and power them up.
```
lsblk -f
```
Note down the UUIDs for each of the drives.  They are 16 characters long.  
Add them to /etc/fstab.

```
UUID=< uuid of usb1 > /mnt/usb_hdd1 ntfs defaults,auto,users,rw,nofail 0 0
UUID=< uuid of usb2 > /mnt/usb_hdd2 ntfs defaults,auto,users,rw,nofail 0 0
```

## Samba

```
sudo apt install samba samba_common_bin -y
sudo useradd nas
sudo groupadd nas
passwd nas
```

Backup /etc/samba/smb.conf and create a new one.

```
sudo mv /etc/samba/smb.conf /etc/samba/smb.conf.orig
sudo nano /etc/samba/smb.conf
```

Put this into /etc/samba/smb.conf

```
[global]
   netbios name = raspberry pi
   workgroup = WORKGROUP
   security = user
   map to guest = bad user
   guest ok = yes
   guest account = nobody
   log file = /var/log/samba/log.%m
   max log size = 50
   panic action = /usr/share/samba/panic.action %d
# Optimization for older Pi hardware
   socket options = TCP_NODELAY IPTOS_LOWDELAY SO_RCVBUF=65536 SO_SNDBUF=65536
   read raw = yes
   write raw = yes
   getwd cache = yes
# Min and Max protocol support
   server min protocol = SMB2_10
   server max protocol = SMB3
# Disable old, insecure protocols
   client min protocol = SMB2
   ntlm auth = yes
[files]
   comment = "Not a NAS"
   path = /mnt/usb_hdd1/
   browsable = yes
   guest ok = yes
   read only = no
   write list = nas
   create mask = 0755
```

Schedule the backups with crontab -e

```
0 3 * * * rsync -av --delete /mnt/usb_hdd1/files/ /mnt/usb_hdd2/files/
```

## Nameserver settings
For me there is one additional step.  That is to fix name resolution, 
because my broadband provider has an odd idea about the local network
name.  To align with the broadband router, edit /etc/avahi/avahi-daemon.conf 

```
domain-name=broadband
```

and /etc/resolv.conf

```
search broadband
```

## Client settings
The samba share can be accessed anonymously in read-only mode.  To get
write access, you need to login with username nas and the password that
you set for this user.  I save these in the file .nas-credentials in 
my home directory.

```
username nas
password <password>
```

Then automount the shared folder in /etc/fstab.

```
//raspberrypi.broadband/Passport /media/pi cifs credentials=/home/<username>/.nas-credentials,iocharset=utf8,uid=1000,gid=1000,x-systemd.automount,_netdev 0 0
```

Done!
