---
title: "Hello (again)"
date: 2026-03-01
---
This is a relaunch of my blog.  I haven't posted anything since 2016 and
whatever I posted so long ago is long forgotten.

My last attempt used HTML and CSS only, and that proved to be quite 
difficult.  This time around, I'm going to use Jekyll, mainly because it
comes with GitHub by default, and free hosting on GitHub is attractive 
to a hobbyist like me.  Jekyll is a static website generator that 
specializes in blogging. Users can use a text editor to create content, 
the platform will then transform it into a static page that is ready to 
be viewed. This has multiple advantages.  For example, a static page 
loads much faster than a dynamic page. Another is that, since the 
website is static, it has no database. That means there is nothing for 
a hacker to hack. However, there are also setbacks. For instance, the 
platform lacks CMS functionality, which means I am going to need to 
be comfortable using markdown to edit pages. I can do that on the GitHub 
app, though the GitHub website, or through a local git repository.  
Both seem quite easy.

I did think of WordPress, which is an open-source CMS, that began as a 
blogging platform, and evolved to do just about anything. This was 
all thanks to the high level of flexibility and customization users 
have at their disposal, because of a truly massive library of plugins 
and themes that the platform offers. Plugins add specific features
to a website - kind of like apps on a smartphone.  Themes determine the 
appearance of the website and can be customized regardless of your 
choice. With thousands of each to choose from, the only limitation in 
WordPress is the owner's creativity.  It comes with an editor -
Gutenberg - but that is browser based, and the smartphone integration
that comes with the Github app, while a more limited editing solution, 
just suits me better.  Wordpress also relies on a backend database 
and SQL injection vulnerabilities scare me a bit.  That's not even to
mention potential vulnerabilities in plugins. 

Having opted for Jekyll, step number one was to choose a theme.  First
I tried the "Gold Standard" Minimal Mistakes.  This was very difficult 
to get into.  I needed fewer choices, and Minima was suggested to me 
as a good alternative.  It is smaller, but still has lots of configuration 
options to learn.  If I have to climb a learning curve, then it might 
as well be the learning curve of Jekyll itself, so I've created the 
Epicurean Theme for myself. Maybe I'll regret that and go back to Minima 
later, but right now the focus is on content rather than presentation. 
Having said that, I think I've done a passable job on the presentation 
too.



